:orphan: 
(digital-forensics-acquiring-evidence)=

# Digital Forensics: Acquiring Evidence

In an era dominated by digital interactions and technological
advancements, the field of digital forensics plays a pivotal role in
unravelling complex mysteries and unveiling hidden truths. At the heart
of this investigative discipline lies the art of collecting evidence, a
process that demands meticulous attention to detail and a comprehensive
understanding of the digital landscape. This process is about carefully
navigating the intricacies of data preservation, integrity, and
admissibility. A central tenet guiding this endeavour is the concept of
the **order of volatility**. By prioritizing the capture of volatile
data before more stable evidence, digital forensics professionals are
able to construct accurate narratives, piece together timelines, and
provide crucial insights into a wide array of investigations, ranging
from cybercrimes to legal disputes. This article explores the essential
best practices for the meticulous process of collecting evidence in
digital forensics, delving into the intricacies of the order of
volatility and its significance in preserving the integrity of digital
evidence.

## Understanding Order of Volatility 

The order of volatility in digital forensics refers to the structured
sequence in which distinct types of digital data are collected and
preserved during an investigation. This principle dictates that digital
evidence should be collected in a specific sequence, based on its
likelihood to change or disappear over time. The collection order is
determined by the likelihood of data changing or disappearing over time.
The order of volatility guides investigators to prioritize the
collection of the most volatile data that is susceptible to rapid
alteration, ensuring that crucial evidence is preserved effectively and
providing a systematic framework for the evidence collection process.

## Order of Volatility: Digital Evidence 

By adhering to the order of volatility principle, investigators can
ensure that the most fragile and fleeting evidence is secured promptly,
bolstering the accuracy and integrity of the investigative process. We
examine below the crucial pieces of evidence gathered during an
investigation, starting with the most volatile evidence and progressing
to the least volatile:

### Random-Access Memory (RAM):  

-   RAM is the most volatile component of a computer system, holding
    active processes, data, and programs currently in use. Its contents
    change rapidly and are highly susceptible to disappearing upon power
    loss or system shutdown. This transient nature makes RAM a critical
    focus for timely evidence collection during investigations.

-   RAM contains a wealth of valuable information, such as open
    applications, running processes, login sessions, and encryption
    keys, offering insights into recent user activities and system
    states.

-   Specialized tools and techniques should be employed to create a
    snapshot or image of the RAM\'s content. These tools ensure that the
    data is captured without introducing any changes, as any
    modification could undermine the accuracy and integrity of the
    evidence.

### Cache: 

-   Cache memory is less volatile than RAM but more volatile than
    persistent storage such as hard drives. Although it can change
    rapidly, it does not vanish as instantly as data stored in RAM when
    power is lost, and as such, it may remain accessible for a brief
    period.

-   Cache is a type of high-speed volatile memory that stores frequently
    accessed data to expedite the CPU\'s processing tasks. Its role is
    to provide quick access to data that the CPU is likely to need again
    in the near future.

-   Specialized tools should be used to create cache snapshots to
    preserve data without alteration. This captures the cache\'s state
    at a specific moment, revealing recent CPU interactions and
    activities.

### Network Data:  

-   Network data is less volatile than components like RAM or cache but
    more volatile than data stored on persistent storage mediums such as
    disks. Network data encompasses information about network
    connections, communication protocols, IP addresses, and data
    transfers between devices. Network data tends to have a slightly
    longer lifespan, allowing investigators a window of opportunity for
    collection before it becomes inaccessible.

-   Collecting network data involves real-time monitoring of ongoing
    traffic, including packet analysis, log file examination, and
    metadata extraction. Specialized tools assist in capturing data for
    insights into communication patterns, security breaches, and data
    exchanges.

-   Network data helps understand information flow, detect threats, and
    reconstruct events, aiding incident timeline reconstruction and
    party identification.

### Swap File (Page File):  

-   The swap file (or page file) is a space on a computer\'s storage
    device used to temporarily store data that the operating system
    moves out of RAM when it needs more space for active programs and
    processes. This process is known as \"paging\" or \"swapping.\" It
    is less volatile than components like RAM or running processes but
    more volatile than data stored on persistent storage media.

-   Its contents can change as the operating system manages memory and
    swaps data between RAM and the swap file. However, the page file\'s
    contents persist longer than RAM\'s volatile data and may remain
    accessible even after the computer is powered off.

-   During a digital forensics investigation, the swap file can
    potentially contain fragments of data that were once in volatile
    memory. This data could include passwords, encryption keys, or other
    sensitive information.

### System Artifacts: 

-   System artifacts are less volatile than components like running
    processes and volatile memory but more volatile than data stored on
    persistent storage media. System artifacts encompass a wide range of
    residual data left behind by various system activities and user
    interactions. This includes log files, browser history, registry
    entries, temporary files, and other traces of system operations.
    These artifacts provide valuable insights into historical activities
    and events that have occurred on a system, such as user actions,
    system configurations, and application usage.

-   Collecting data related to system artifacts involves extracting and
    analyzing the residual data left behind by system activities. This
    may include reviewing log files, examining the system\'s registry,
    analyzing browser history, and identifying temporary files or cached
    data.

-   Investigators should use specialized tools to extract and analyze
    artifacts in order to ensure the content does not become altered.
    Forensic experts should also prioritize artifact preservation and
    documentation for integrity maintenance.

### Snapshot:  

-   A snapshot is a static representation frozen in time, allowing
    investigators to examine and analyze the system\'s state without
    altering it. Snapshots are taken to preserve a specific
    configuration or set of data, providing a reference point for
    analysis and comparison. Snapshots are less volatile than running
    processes, volatile memory, and other real-time system components.

-   Snapshots are static and remain unchanged once created. They offer a
    valuable opportunity to examine the state of a system or data at a
    specific moment, even after the system has continued its operations.

-   Collecting snapshots involves creating copies of the system\'s state
    or data at a particular point in time. For instance, snapshots can
    be taken of a virtual machine, a file system, or a database. These
    snapshots are then stored separately from the original system,
    ensuring that any subsequent analysis does not alter the original
    data. Snapshots are particularly useful in digital forensics
    investigations for preservation of evidence, comparative analysis,
    reconstruction and evidence documentation.

### Devices:  

-   External hard drives or USB devices are less volatile compared to
    components like RAM but more volatile than persistent storage media
    like hard drives.

-   The device should be powered off to preserve its data integrity and
    secured to prevent tampering. The device details should be
    documented and a chain of custody log started. Create a forensically
    sound image without altering the original data. Verify image
    integrity with cryptographic hashes. Examine the file system using
    forensic software, identifying relevant data. Recover deleted or
    hidden data if applicable.

-   Analyze collected data for evidence, documenting findings. Prepare a
    clear and concise forensic report. Securely store both the original
    device and forensic image. Ensure legal and regulatory compliance,
    obtain necessary authorizations. Maintain an unbroken chain of
    custody for the evidence. This structured approach maintains
    evidence integrity and legal admissibility.

### Firmware:  

-   Firmware, such as BIOS or firmware on embedded devices, falls into
    the less volatile category compared to RAM or cache. It typically
    requires specific actions to modify. It retains data even when
    powered off, but it can still be altered if not handled carefully.

-   Gain physical access to the device containing the firmware, ensuring
    it\'s powered off. Create a forensically sound firmware image using
    specialized tools. Verify image integrity via cryptographic hash
    values. Analyze the image for anomalies, documenting findings.

-   Securely store the original device and image. Comply with legal
    requirements for evidence collection to maintain integrity and
    admissibility. This helps preserve the integrity and admissibility
    of the evidence in a legal context.

### Operating System (OS):  
-   The OS is a stable component; however, updates and changes can
    occur. Registers store data related to the CPU\'s current
    operations, and CPU cache holds frequently used data. They can
    change rapidly and are essential for the CPU\'s real-time
    operations. It offers real-time insights into the system\'s
    activities but may be overwritten or closed during the
    investigation. Capturing this data early is crucial. Data stored on
    disk, including the OS files and user data, is less volatile. It
    remains intact until modified or deleted. File system metadata may
    change as files are created, modified, or deleted.

-   Immediately isolate the target system to prevent changes. Disconnect
    from network and power, if needed. Record OS make, model, version,
    updates, hostname, and IP address if applicable. Use specialized
    tools for a forensically sound image of the OS, including the
    storage device. Ensure no data is written back to the original
    device. Confirm image integrity using cryptographic hashes. Examine
    for tampering, unauthorized access, or suspicious activities.

-   Employ forensic techniques to recover deleted or hidden data. Review
    user accounts, permissions, and access logs, especially privileged
    accounts. Check system, event, and security logs for unusual events
    or security breaches. Store the original system or storage device
    securely and restrict access to authorized personnel. Ensure all
    actions align with legal and regulatory requirements, obtaining
    necessary authorizations.

### Disks:  

-   Disks, including hard drives and SSDs, are the least volatile
    components. Data stored on disks remains intact even after power
    loss, making them stable storage options compared to more volatile
    components.

-   Isolate the system to prevent changes, document disk details, and
    disconnect from networks and power if necessary. Use specialized
    tools to create a forensically sound image of the entire disk,
    ensuring data is not written back to it. Confirm the image\'s
    integrity with cryptographic hashes to ensure it\'s an exact copy of
    the original disk. Examine the image for signs of tampering,
    unauthorized access, malware, and deleted files, documenting
    findings.

-   Analyze file systems for structure, permissions, and metadata.
    Secure both the original disk and the forensic image with strict
    access controls. Ensure all actions adhere to legal and regulatory
    requirements, including obtaining necessary authorizations. This
    approach maintains evidence integrity and admissibility in legal
    proceedings.

-   Following the order of volatility ensures that digital forensic
    investigators prioritize the collection of volatile data that is
    most likely to be lost or altered quickly. This approach helps
    preserve the integrity of the evidence and allows investigators to
    reconstruct events accurately. In the following section, we will
    delve into widely acknowledged best practices for evidence
    collection in digital forensics investigations.

## Best Practices for Effective Evidence Collection in Digital Forensics 

Industry best practices in digital evidence collection are crucial for
maintaining the integrity of evidence and ensuring its admissibility in
legal proceedings. These practices are followed by digital forensics
professionals, law enforcement agencies, and legal experts to conduct
thorough and reliable investigations. Here, we delve into the
fundamental steps to be undertaken when collecting evidence during an
investigation:

### Photograph the Computer and Scene: 

-   It is essential to capture a comprehensive visual record of the
    computer system and its immediate physical environment. This
    involves the systematic documentation of the computer\'s physical
    setup, encompassing its placement, connections, and any peripherals
    involved. Additionally, it\'s crucial to capture any physical
    evidence or artifacts in the vicinity that might have a bearing on
    the investigation.

-   These photographs serve as a visual reference that can aid in
    reconstructing the context in which digital evidence was collected
    and provide valuable insights into the potential sources of any
    anomalies or discrepancies uncovered during the investigation.

-   Screenshots can often serve as a tamper-proof method when advanced
    memory tools are not available. They prevent unintended system
    changes and potential legal complications. Screenshots are a valid
    alternative when optimal methods like photos or screen videos cannot
    be used, especially when prioritizing data integrity over tampering
    risks.

### Power State: 

-   When encountering a computer that is powered off, it is imperative
    not to attempt to turn it on. This cautious approach is rooted in
    the understanding that powering on the device, even with the best
    intentions, carries the risk of inadvertently altering or damaging
    crucial digital evidence.

-   Conversely, when the computer is already powered on, a meticulous
    documentation process comes into play. This involves capturing
    photographic evidence of the computer screen, ensuring that the
    images accurately portray the state of any active applications or
    processes at that specific moment in time. This photographic record
    serves as a snapshot of the digital landscape, providing valuable
    insights into the ongoing activities and potentially relevant data
    that may be pertinent to the investigation.

### Collect Live Data: 

-   The collection of live data typically begins with the acquisition of
    a Random-Access Memory (RAM) image, achieved through the utilization
    of specialized tools. This initial step is pivotal as it enables the
    capture of volatile data elements, such as currently running
    processes and open files. Additional information should be gathered,
    including the system\'s network connection status, a record of
    logged-on users, and an inventory of currently executing processes.

### Hard Disk Encryption: 

-   The detection and handling of hard disk encryption is a crucial step
    in evidence gathering. This entails the utilization of specialized
    tools to identify encryption mechanisms. Once the presence of
    encryption is confirmed, the investigative process extends to the
    collection of a \"logical image\" of the encrypted hard disk.

-   Furthermore, in scenarios where remote data collections are
    required, the implementation of remote collection tool comes into
    play, which empowers digital forensics experts to gather essential
    data securely and efficiently from target systems, even when
    physical access is not feasible.

### Power Disconnection: 

-   For desktop computer systems, commence by unplugging the power cord
    from the rear of the tower. This step is fundamental in halting the
    electrical supply to the system, thereby preventing any unintended
    changes or alterations to the data stored within.

-   In the case of laptops that might not power down upon removing the
    power cord, it\'s essential to also extract the laptop\'s battery.
    This comprehensive approach guarantees that the laptop is completely
    depowered, mitigating the risk of any inadvertent data modifications
    during the investigative process.

### Diagram and Label Cords:

-   Begin by creating a detailed diagram that comprehensively
    illustrates the arrangement of cords, cables, and connections within
    the setup. This visual representation serves as a crucial reference
    point, enabling investigators to accurately reconstruct the
    configuration during later stages of the investigation.

-   In tandem with diagramming, adopt a meticulous labelling protocol.
    Attach clear and concise labels to each cord and connection,
    ensuring that they are uniquely identifiable. These labels should
    correspond to the elements depicted in the diagram, establishing a
    direct link between visual representation and physical components.

### Device Documentation: 

-   Rigorously document the model numbers and serial numbers of each
    device under scrutiny. These unique identifiers serve as the bedrock
    for accurate reference and identification throughout the
    investigation.

-   Complementing textual records, photographic documentation offers a
    visual archive of the devices in their original state. Capturing
    clear and detailed images of each device, along with its associated
    model and serial numbers, further fortifies the evidentiary trail.

### Cord and Device Disconnection: 

-   Initiate the disconnection process in a methodical sequence,
    beginning with peripheral devices and auxiliary connections. This
    entails unplugging devices such as keyboards, mice, external drives,
    and any additional hardware components. Employ a systematic
    labelling and diagramming strategy to document the original
    configuration of cords and connections.

-   Each cord, cable, and connector should be labelled or annotated to
    correspond to its specific port or slot on the computer or device.
    During the disconnection process, take great care to preserve the
    relative positions of cords and devices. This includes maintaining
    the orientation and alignment of cables as they were originally
    connected.

### Hidden Protected Areas (HPA) Check and Hard Drive Imaging: 

-   Begin by meticulously inspecting hard drives for the presence of
    HPA. These covert regions within a drive can potentially conceal
    critical data that may be relevant to the investigation. Carefully
    scrutinize each drive to detect and access these concealed sectors.

-   A pivotal aspect of this procedure is the forensically sound imaging
    of hard drives. Employ specialized write-blocking hardware or
    software solutions to ensure that the original data on the drive
    remains entirely untouched throughout the imaging process. This
    preservation of data integrity is paramount to maintain the
    evidentiary value of the information contained within the hard
    drive.

### Packaging and Labelling: 

-   To mitigate the risk of electrostatic discharge, it is essential to
    place all electronic components within specially designed
    anti-static evidence bags. These bags serve as a protective barrier,
    shielding the delicate internal components from potential damage
    caused by static electricity.

-   An integral facet of this process is the meticulous labelling of
    these evidence bags. Each bag should be clearly and comprehensively
    labelled to provide essential information for tracking and
    documentation. This typically includes details such as the date and
    time of collection, the unique case number associated with the
    investigation, and a concise item description that precisely
    identifies the contents of the bag.

### Additional Storage Media: 

-   This entails extending scrutiny to any additional storage media that
    might be present. This includes external hard drives, USB drives,
    and memory cards. A critical step in this process is the creation of
    forensic images of these secondary storage media. Forensic imaging
    involves creating a bit-by-bit copy of the entire storage device,
    ensuring that the original data remains entirely intact and
    unaltered.

-   Forensic imaging safeguards the original content stored on these
    media, preventing any inadvertent modifications or deletions during
    the investigation. By working with forensic images rather than the
    original media, investigators can conduct in-depth analysis and
    examination without introducing any changes or contamination to the
    original evidence.

### Protect Media: 

-   In addition to protecting evidence from physical damage, digital
    forensics professionals must also guard against potential
    electromagnetic interference that could compromise the data stored
    on various media.

-   This means keeping all collected media, whether it\'s a hard drive,
    USB drive, memory card, or any other storage device, well clear of
    any magnets, radio transmitters, or other sources of electromagnetic
    fields or radiation. These external factors have the potential to
    interfere with the data stored on these media, causing corruption or
    loss of critical information.

-   By implementing these measures to shield collected media from
    potential damage, digital forensics experts help ensure the
    reliability and integrity of the evidence throughout the
    investigation process. This mindfulness bolsters the credibility of
    findings and supports the admissibility of evidence in legal
    proceedings, underscoring the significance of this safeguard in the
    field of digital forensics.

### Documentation and Notes: 

-   Beyond the physical hardware and digital data, it is crucial to
    gather and preserve all relevant instruction manuals, documentation,
    and any handwritten or typed notes associated with the devices and
    their setup. Instruction manuals and documentation can provide
    valuable insights into the technical specifications,
    functionalities, and configurations of the devices under
    examination. They may contain information about default settings,
    passwords, or specific features that could be pertinent to the case.

-   Furthermore, handwritten or typed notes, whether they belong to the
    system\'s user or an IT administrator, can offer a unique
    perspective on the device\'s history and usage. These notes may
    include records of maintenance, troubleshooting, software
    installations, or even user activities, shedding light on the
    context and potential motivations behind the digital evidence being
    analyzed.

-   This record not only aids in understanding the technical aspects of
    the case but also provides critical contextual details that can be
    invaluable in reconstructing events, identifying potential threats,
    and presenting a complete and accurate case narrative in legal
    proceedings.

### Record Seizure Steps: 

-   In digital forensics investigations, meticulous record-keeping
    during the evidence seizure process is paramount. This comprehensive
    documentation involves the systematic recording of every step taken,
    from the initial identification of potential evidence to its final
    secure storage.

-   Photographs play a crucial role in this process, as they provide
    visual documentation of the state of the evidence at the time of
    seizure. These images capture the physical condition of devices,
    their connections, and their surroundings, serving as visual
    reference points for later analysis and courtroom presentations.

-   Diagrams complement photographs by offering a more abstract
    representation of the setup. They can include schematic drawings of
    device connections, network configurations, or even physical layouts
    of the scene. Such diagrams aid in reconstructing the exact setup
    and can help investigators and legal professionals visualize the
    context in which the evidence was collected.

-   Furthermore, the documentation should encompass detailed
    descriptions of decisions made during the seizure. This includes the
    rationale behind selecting specific pieces of evidence, the choice
    of collection methods, and any on-site assessments of potential
    risks or challenges.

By diligently recording seizure steps through photographs, diagrams, and
decision logs, digital forensics practitioners create a comprehensive
and transparent record of the evidence collection process. This not only
bolsters the integrity of the investigation but also facilitates
effective communication with legal authorities and ensures that all
actions align with established protocols and legal requirements. This
meticulous documentation is an essential cornerstone of the rigorous and
accountable approach that characterizes the field of digital forensics.

# Final Words

In conclusion, the significance of adhering to the order of volatility
and implementing best practices in evidence collection within the field
of digital forensics cannot be overstated. These principles not only
safeguard critical evidence, maintain data integrity, and promote
efficiency but also adapt to the ever-evolving technological landscape.
A steadfast commitment to these fundamentals ensures that investigations
are conducted rigorously, serving the cause of justice by accurately
preserving digital evidence and providing a robust groundwork for
subsequent analysis and legal proceedings. In this dynamic and complex
field, meticulous documentation and strict adherence to established
protocols remain imperative, guaranteeing the integrity of the digital
forensic process.